dmj-pub-uf.zip
==============

Included files:

    dmj-exam.upr    Example parameters using these formulas
    dmj-pub.txt     This file
    dmj.ucl         Coloring formulas
    dmj.ufm         Fractal formulas
    dmj.uxf         Transformation formulas

More information can be found at this web site:

    http://www.fractalus.com/ultrafractal/dmj-pub-uf.htm
    
You can always download a current version of these formulas from here:

    ftp://ftp.fractalus.com/pub/extras/dmj-pub-uf.zip

You can read about re-use guidelines here:

    http://www.fractalus.com/ultrafractal/dmj-pub-uf-reuse.htm

This covers re-use for both the formulas and images. There has been a lot
of confusion about this in the past, so PLEASE take a moment and review
the above web page if you have not already done so.


Changes in v2.1
---------------

All files, all formulas:
  + Cleaned up and expanded some comments.

dmj.ufm
  + Added Orbit Boost types for Mandelbrot/Julia and Nova Mandelbrot/
    Julia fractals. These perform normal iteration except within a
    "boost" region, which alters the iteration value in a variety of
    ways.
  + Added a "Coloring Only" option to all +fBm types, which applies
    the fBm distortion only to the orbit value passed to the coloring
    algorithm. The actual fractal orbit is unchanged.
  + Added SlopeJulia2. This is like the other Slope formulas, but with
    the Julia2 fractal type.
  + Added (cough) Slope (LambdaJulia). It was erroneously left out.
  + Fixed SlopeTrap (Mandelbrot) so that it works; fixed both SlopeTrap
    formulas so that they compile without warnings.
  + Reset default height value for Slope (Julia) to "distance estimator".
    This is now consistent with the other Slope types.

dmj.ucl
  + Orbit Traps now has a new option: Repeat Center. This can be used
    to change where the repeating is centered in the complex plane.
  + Added fBm II coloring, which calculates an fBm value at every
    iteration and totals them up for the entire orbit.

dmj.uxf
  + General Inversion now has an alternate "line" mode which inverts
    only a single axis. This is especially useful for certain
    perspective effects.
  + Added fBm Clipping. This allows you to clip a region based on fBm
    texture.
  + LowRes now has a "rotate" parameter that lets you set the angle of
    the low resolution grid.
  + Added Mosaic. This can turn an image into a group of mosaic tiles.
  + Added Spots. This can make an image appear as though it's been
    drawn with spots.
  + Added Forces. This sprinkles the image with attractive and repelling
    points, which push and pull parts of the image.
    
dmj-exam.upr
  + Added "Tordu" and "Cloud Nine".
  

Changes in v2.0
---------------

All files, all formulas:
  + Hooks for online help for all of the formulas and parameters have
    been added. I am in the process of writing this help, but several
    people urged me NOT to delay the release of the formulas, so you
    have the formulas now, and the documentation will follow later.
    Until then, the ? help icon won't do you any good, but hint text
    (which you get by just pointing to the parameter entry field) does
    still work.

dmj.ufm
  + Added Lambda in Mandelbrot and Julia forms. This simply iterates
    the equation z[n+1] = r*z[n]*(1-z[n]), the classical logistics
    equation, with complex numbers.
  + Added Slope (Lambda) in Mandelbrot and Julia forms. This is the
    Lyapunov type, set up to work with the Lighting coloring formula.
  + Added SlopeTrap in Mandelbrot and Julia forms. Think of it this
    way: what Slope did with smooth colorings, SlopeTrap does with
    orbit trap methods.
  + Added DoubleMandel and DoubleJulia. These are the classical
    Mandelbrot/Julia fractals but with a second term in the equation.
    They are to Mandelbrot/Julia fractals as DoubleNova is to Nova.
  + Added Markus-Lyapunov. This is a version of the forced-periodic
    growth logistics equation iterator. Use with Markus-Lyapunov
    coloring. This is a slow formula.
  + Added Mandelbrot+fBm and Julia+fBm. These types uses the fBm noise
    algorithm to perturb the orbit of Mandelbrot and Julia sets at
    each iteration. These are slow formulas.
  + Added Nova+fBm in Mandelbrot and Julia forms. These are like the
    other +fBm formulas, but using the Nova equation instead of the
    classic Mandelbrot/Julia equation. These are slow formulas.
  + Added PhoenixDoubleHalleyNova, in Mandelbrot and Julia forms. These
    add an inductive term to DoubleHalleyNova types.
  + Added Torus (Julibrot), which renders toroidal sections of 4D
    Julibrot space. With certain parameters, these images are tileable.
  + Added Torus (Nova), which renders toroidal sections of 4D
    NovaM/J space. With certain parameters, these images are tileable.
    I will add more parameters to these torus types in the future, but
    I thought people might want to play with these now.
  + Added Bifurcation fractal types. These emulate the bifurcation
    family of plots from FractInt. These plots do not really fit very
    well into the Ultra Fractal rendering model, I include them only
    because they are helpful in explaining certain mathematical
    properties of chaos, and as an example of writing formulas that
    render these types of plots.
  + Added StutterMandel, which iterates the Mandelbrot set but
    periodically "resets" the c value to the current z value. (There
    is no Julia type for this.)
  + Added ManyJulia and ManyNova. These types can be used to render
    many Julia or NovaJulia fractals into the same image, using a
    tile-based grid.
  + Added Simurgh in Mandelbrot and Julia forms. This is a doubly-
    inductive type, in that each iteration depends on the values of
    the past three iterations. It is an extension of the Phoenix
    type (in fact, you can render all Phoenix fractals with this
    formula if you set Simurgh Distortion 2 to zero).

dmj.ucl
  + Added a new trap shape to both Orbit Traps and Twin Traps: radial
    ripples. These complement the ring ripples type.
  + Added new trap shapes to both Orbit Traps and Twin Traps: radial
    waves and radial waves 2. These wrap one or two sine waves around
    a point. Use Trap Frequency to adjust the frequency of the waves;
    use Trap Order to adjust the height of the waves; use Diameter to
    adjust the diameter of the circle the waves are centered on.
  + Added transfer functions for trap distances to Orbit Traps, and
    pre- and post-scaling factors. I'll add these to Twin Traps later.
  + Added an option to use a solid color for points outside the "trap"
    areas, for Orbit Traps and Twin Traps.
  + Added A and B trap weighting parameters to Twin Traps. You can use
    this to give a "preference" to one trap over another. The default
    weights of 1.0 will reproduce the old, unweighted behavior.
  + Added Fractional Brownian Motion coloring (fBm). This can be used
    to create zoomable clouds and bumpy textures.
  + Added new modes (angle, real, imaginary) to Distance Estimator
    coloring.
  + Added Markus-Lyapunov coloring, for use with Markus-Lyapunov
    fractal type.
  + Lyapunov coloring (not to be confused with Markus-Lyapunov) has a
    new option: Smooth Coloring. If set, uses the same smoothing
    algorithm as Triangle Inequality Coloring to interpolate between
    iteration values for a smoother result. This works best for the
    Mandelbrot and Julia and derived types.
  + Added Bifurcation coloring, for bifurcation plots.
  + Added Sampling coloring, which works by checking the distance of
    the orbit to the pixel at each iteration. Not only can the discrete
    points in the orbit be tested, but also the full line-segment path
    traced by the orbit points.
  
dmj.uxf
  + Added fBm Glass 1, which can be used to apply one-dimensional
    turbulence (linear or radial) to an image.
  + Added Triangle Inequality Average Glass 1, which does the same
    thing as fBm Glass 1, but using Mandelbrot-based TIA coloring
    as the basis for the turbulence.
  + Added Rectangular to Polar, which converts Cartesian coordinates
    to polar coordinates.
  + Added Polar to Rectangular, which converts polar coordinates back
    to Cartesian coordinates.
  + Added Mirror, which can be used to reflect an image along an
    arbitrary axis.
  + Added Offset, which can be used to move a fractal. You can
    accomplish the same thing by changing location, but this transform
    allows you to accomplish the same shifting within a sequence of
    transformations, and also to adjust the scale of the movement
    without having to compute coordinates yourself.
  + Added Stretch, which can be used to stretch the image horizontally
    or vertically. This transform is geared towards being easily
    added to a fractal after it has already been zoomed.
  + Added Blob Clipping, which allows clipping shapes to be set up
    based on 2D blobs. Up to eight blobs per transform may be used.

dmj-exam.upr
  + "9", "April Pond", "In Defiance of Vision" (2nd Place, Limited
    Color, Fractal-Art '99 Contest), "Inescapable Problems", "New Box
    of Crayons", and "Turbulence Cubed" added. These all (except for
    "Problems") use at least one of the fBm formulas in some fashion.


Changes in v1.8
---------------

dmj.ufm
  + All Nova and HalleyNova types have a new parameter, "Relaxation".
    This can be used to slow down convergence and reduce the amount of
    chaos in the image. Of course, it can also be used to increase the
    chaos as well. The default value of 1.0 will produce the old
    behavior (so your old parameters will work). Values below 1.0 will
    produce less chaotic images, and values above 1.0 will produce
    more chaotic images. Complex values are totally illogical, but very
    interesting.
  + Added PhoenixNova and PhoenixHalleyNova types, in both Mandelbrot
    and Julia form. These use an "inductive" term like Phoenix fractals,
    but with the Nova and HalleyNova formulas.
  + Added Mandelbrot-Nova type. This formula alternates between
    Mandelbrot and Nova formulas at each iteration. You can adjust the
    frequency with which it switches formulas as well.

dmj.ucl
  + The "Diameter" setting in Orbit Traps now can be negative. This is
    mostly useful with the waves trap shapes.
  + Minor speed optimizations to funky average 3 and 6 trap modes.
  + Twin Traps coloring added. This is based loosely on the ideas of
    Kerry Mitchell, coupled with my own illogical extrapolations. The
    concept is simple: use two trap shapes, and combine the distances
    to those traps at each step to get a single distance, which is then
    processed in the normal trap mode fashion. Some of the more esoteric
    parameters from Orbit Traps were not included in this formula, to
    keep it a bit more manageable.

dmj-exam.upr
  + "Evil Lurks", "Fractal Ear", and "Las Vegas" added.


Changes in v1.71
----------------

This is just a bug-fix release.

dmj.uxf
  + "Screen-Relative" coordinates in the "Clipping" transform will now
    work as expected if your fractal is rotated, and "Allow Rotation" is
    disabled. Thanks to Janet Preslar for spotting this problem.


Changes in v1.7
---------------

dmj.ucl
  + "Waves" trap shapes added. These are similar to the "lines" trap
    shape, except that the lines are sine waves. Use Trap Order to
    adjust the height of the waves, and Diameter to change the
    distance between them.
  + A new trap parameter, "Trap Frequency", was added to control the
    frequency of the wave trap types. It also works for the ripple
    types, too, and has the inverse effect of modifying Diameter for
    ripple types.
  + New trap parameters "Skew" and "Skew Step" were added. These are
    like the Rotation and Rotation Step parameters, except they skew
    instead of rotate.
  + New trap parameters "Start Iteration", "Trap Iterations", and
    "Skip Iterations" were added. You can use these to omit certain
    iterations from being considered for orbit trap behavior. For
    example, if Start Iteration is 200, then the first 200 iterations
    will be ignored as far as orbit traps are concerned. If Trap
    Iterations and Skip Iterations are both set to 1, then alternate
    iterations will be used (one checked, one ignored).
  + New trap coloring "angle to origin 2" duplicates the atan coloring
    scheme in the obsolete coloring method ReallyCool that came with
    beta versions of UF. You can convert your old ReallyCool images
    to Orbit Traps by using trap shape hypercross, trap mode closest,
    and this new coloring.
  + Trap shapes and coloring modes were reordered to a more sensible
    progression.

dmj.uxf
  + "Clipping" transformation was added. This is similar in purpose
    to Luke Plant's "Scissors" transformation, but its interface is a
    bit simpler: point and click selects the control points of the
    clipping shape. You can clip either the inside or outside of the
    shape.
  + The "Strict Bailout" in the "Select (Mandelbrot)" transformation
    now works. This adjusts the bailout differently for each pixel and
    overrides the Bailout setting.
  + "Select" types for Julia, Phoenix Julia, and Nova Julia were added.
  + "Julia", "Phoenix Julia", and "Nova Julia" transforms were added.
    These allow you to warp the fractal with a few iterations of these
    fractal types.

dmj-exam.upr
  + "Atlas", "Melt-O-Waves", and "Gorgon" added.


Changes in v1.6
---------------

My apologies for making another release so quickly, but Janet Preslar
had some excellent ideas and timing was important.

dmj.ucl
  + "Egg" orbit trap shape was added. Use Trap Order to change the
    egginess, and trap Diameter to tweak the spacing between egg foci.

dmj.uxf
  + Egg Scissors transform was added. You can use this to isolate an
    egg-shaped area of your fractal, in much the same way as Luke Plant's
    general Scissors transform does.


Changes in v1.5
---------------

dmj.ufm
  + Added SinNova types. These are the Nova form of the equation
    sin(z)^n - 1 = 0. Both Mandelbrot and Julia types are available.
  + Added DoubleNova types. These are the Nova form of the equation
    az^m + bz^n - 1 = 0. Both Mandelbrot and Julia types are available.
  + Added DoubleHalleyNova types. These are the HalleyNova form of
    the equation az^m + bz^n - 1 = 0. Both Mandelbrot and Julia types
    are available.
  + All Julia types can now toggle back to their Mandelbrot types.

dmj.ucl
  + Added Finite Attractor coloring for Inside points. This is similar
    to the default coloring method based on iterations, except it
    counts how many iterations before the orbit settles into a periodic
    cycle. This is a discrete coloring method (it always produces
    bands).
  + Added Curvature Average coloring. This produces results similar,
    but not identical, to Triangle Inequality Average.

dmj.uxf
  + General Inversion was added. This extends the concept of inversion
    to include other curves besides circles.
  + Mandelbrot transform was added. This applies a few iterations of
    the Mandelbrot equation, and is useful for warping convergent
    fractals (like Newtons and Newton-derivatives).

dmj-exam.upr
  + Added "Ethereal", "Lure", and "Promise of Spring".


Changes in v1.4
---------------

In accordance with the new naming convention, all the formula files
have been renamed without the "-pub" suffix. If you have not already
modified your parameter files to work with the new scheme, you will
need to do so.

dmj.ufm
  + HalleyNova formulas were added. These are fractals similar to
    the Nova family, but they use Halley's method instead of Newton's
    method.

dmj.ucl
  + The "heart" trap shape was added. Use "Trap Order" to adjust the
    "fatness" of the hearts.
  + The "ripples" trap shapes were added. Use "Diameter" to adjust the
    spacing between ripples; use "Trap Order" to adjust the fade-out
    range of the ripples.
  + If you use the "Trap Center Moves" option, the "Trap Center" value
    is now an offset from the pixel location. Previously it had no
    effect when "Moves" was enabled. If your images using "Moves" do
    not render correctly, reset their "Trap Center" values to zero.
  + More optimizations of "Orbit Traps" were done.
  + "Triangle Inequality Average" now has some new parameters that let
    you alter values before they are averaged. The default settings for
    these parameters produce the old behavior.


Changes in v1.3
---------------

dmj-exam.upr
  + Several additions and removals, made at the suggestion of
    Frederik Slijkerman. This file was not previously included in
    the distribution. It replaces the dmj-exam.upr that comes with
    Ultra Fractal.

dmj-pub.ucl
  + Minor optimizations made to "Orbit Traps"; it should run a
    little bit faster.
  + Two new trap modes were added to "Orbit Traps", named "funky
    average 6" and "trap only". "Trap only" lets you see the trap
    regardless of iteration, which can be useful for examining
    different traps and the effects of various parameters on the
    trap shape.
  + Astroid trap shapes were added to "Orbit Traps". You can use
    the "Trap Order" (formerly "Pinch Order") to set the exponent
    used to calculate the astroid curve. Use 0.666667 for the
    classic astroid shape; other values can produce interesting
    results.
  + "Lyapunov" coloring added; this colors based on the Lyapunov
    exponent.
  + "Spiral" coloring added; this colors with spiral gradients
    like Kai's Power Tools. Note this only works for the classic
    Mandelbrot set at the moment.

dmj-pub.ufm
  + Added "Mandelbrot (Inverted)" type. This is the Mandelbrot
    set, but using an inverted z. This will give interesting
    results for coloring algorithms which expect a converging z,
    and will also allow inverted orbit trap shapes. A Julia
    version was added as well.
  + Julia2 and Julia3 were modified to allow a "pattern" string.
    This pattern indicates when each seed should be used.
    Previously, seeds could only alternate. Now you can make one
    seed be used for three iterations, then the other (pattern
    "1112")--just as an example.
  + Added "Nova-I" types, Mandelbrot and Julia. These are the
    Nova formulas, but using an inverted z. This will give
    interesting results for coloring algorithms which expect a
    diverging z, and will also allow inverted orbit trap shapes.
    Note this does not make these types work with Smoothed
    Iterations and methods which rely on it, except for the
    Julia flavor when c=(0,0) (which gives a classic Newton
    fractal).
  + Fixed a problem with NovaJulia2-Step1a not working correctly.
  + Added "smallest |atan(z)|" to "Slope" types. This gives
    height values based on the smallest angle of z.

dmj-pub.uxf
  + Added "Low Resolution", which you can use to reduce the
    resolution of a fractal arbitrarily on each axis. This can
    produce interesting tile effects when used with reversible
    transformations (the same transformation, but in an opposite
    direction).
  + Added "Unspiral", which you can use to straighten the arms
    of a fractal spiral (these are usually logarithmic spirals).
    You can also use it to ADD such a spiral effect to a fractal.
